Affinity rules (#226)
openshift/openshift-origin-design: web-console/knikubevirt/Affinity/affinity.md

# Affinity

### About Affinity
Affinity provieds the user to create a relationship between two resources chen scheduling them on the cluster.
There are two high level relationship types:
Affinity - attaching a group of resources together, making them run together in the same environment.
Anti-affinity - creating a rejection relationship between a group of resources, thus avoiding sheduling any of them to the same evironment.

Besides defining if we want to attach or reject resources to one another, we can choose to "Force" this rule we are creating.
"Forcing" a rule means what the conditions of this rule must met, even if it means that some resources just won't be scheduled at all.

### a few techincal words
Affinity rules are Pods Property, written in the pod deployment file. When a pod is scheduled, the deployment file mentions that there is an affinity rule conditions which needs to be met.
Selecting resources to affinity is usually done via labels. This makes sense since objects within k8 are temporary, and usually the way to target the same resource which keeps on crashing and regenerating is by it's label.

## affinity rules - list page

> ![Affinity list](img/D2-0-0.jpg)

Author: I presume it is left aligned, not on top. Updating images. Let me know if I got it wrong

All affinity rules within the system can be viewed and managed from this page. It is located in the Master side navigation, in 'Workloads' under 'Secrets'

## creating an affinity rule from Affinity Rules page

Clicking on the "Add affinity rule" button at the top of the affinity list will open up the "Add affinty rule" modal.

> ![Affinity rule modal - default](img/D2-1-0.jpg)

Reviewer: This checkbox sounds scary. I wonder if we could simplify it or have a tooltip to better describe the implications of it.

Author: I rather stick to a checkbox, but a toggle might be easier to get:
WDYT?
![D2-1-0A](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/48942365/60789789-992c5180-a168-11e9-8a17-9812f9006dd7.jpg)
![D2-1-0B](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/48942365/60789790-99c4e800-a168-11e9-8936-a193dfa3e668.jpg)

Reviewer: hmmm interesting. I like the simplicity of the checkbox too, but the radio does provide more context. 
My concern with the checkbox is left unchecked is it clear that they've chosen preferred?
What if the radio was "Rule conditions: Preferred or Required"?
I'm still wondering if adding an info tooltip could be helpful here too. Do we need to define what these things mean more clearly? I could see confusion on the users part if they aren't 100% familiar with affinity strictness.
 - Preferred "Will be apply this rule if possible but will not stop it from being scheduled"
 - Required "This resource will not be scheduled if rule is not met"
Does it feel like too much information to throw at the user?

Author: Looking at the two options (updated here according to your feedback) I can't determine which one is better:
![D2-1-0A](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/48942365/60869807-55a11880-a238-11e9-9558-327066180ea7.jpg)
![D2-1-0B](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/48942365/60869808-55a11880-a238-11e9-9c5d-f46a1d9f1ad2.jpg)

This is entering the realm of proper A/B user testing :)
I did run these with some random (non-tech savvy) people and apparently, the checkbox was clearer to them. The radio button option made them start to actually think about 'What is the difference between the two options'. So they lingered on this field trying to figure out something that is technically beyond them. The checkbox was more of a no-brainer since they felt it's an "Advanced" settings that probably needed to be left to default.

The main issue I have with the checkbox is on the List view, were becoming difficult to describe the user's selection. Like, what is the title, and what do I mark when it is not checked?
Other than that, I'm not worried that the user will get that this rule is "Preferred" since we are not talking in that terminology (We already somewhat drifted from the K8 terminology anyway)
If the list view makes sense then I think checkbox is better.

Of course, we can continue searching for the right copy for the radio buttons.

Reviewer: I'm leaning towards the checkbox with the help text. (we can probably align the design a bit more with PF4 helper text).
Curious what others opinions are on this. @lizsurette @yfrimanm @yuvalgalanti 
I see this as an important feature to understand with affinity so it will be great to think it through. Could be a good case for some user testing too.

> ![Affinity rule modal - default](img/D2-1-0.jpg)

Author: Right

> Going top to bottom, the user will choose of to create an affinity (attachment), which is pre-selected, or change to Anti-affinity (rejection).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Going top to bottom, the user will choose to create an affinity (attachment), which is pre-selected, or change to Anti-affinity (rejection).
```

> Then, the user will select the resources he wish to apply that rule on by adding their representative labels to the "Select resources by label" field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, the user will select the resources he wishes to apply that rule to by adding their representative labels to the "Select resources by label" field.
```

> *Please note that we are aware that it is quite dificult to select resources via labels alone, without seeing any mention on the resources those labels represent, without selecting resources directly first or without any label autocomplete. We already have a few designs to resolve that issue, but these designs affect the rest of the system too and are out of scope. for the moment, we are aiming to get the most minimal design merged and take it from there, while sticking to how it actually works in k8.*

Reviewer: @beanh66 @lizsurette I think this is good info to pass on to the reader of this doc but wonder about this approach. Do we want to state the gaps of the design? WDYT?

Reviewer 2: I could go either way. I don't think it hurts, but also don't think we need it :)

Author: Removing it

![applying rule](img/D2-1-1.jpg)

> Before applying, the user choose if to check the "Force this rule" checkbox, making this rule a must met conditions when scheduling the resources targeted by the added labels above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before applying, the user can check the "Force this rule" checkbox, making this rule a required condition when scheduling the resources targeted by the added labels above.
```

> In this case, the user choose to apply this rule without "forcing" it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this case, the user chose to apply this rule without "forcing" it.
```

The user now returns to the Affinity rules list.

# Affinity rules list on a resource details page

> ![VM details page - overview tab - affinity section](img/D1-0-0.jpg)

Reviewer: very picky but maybe we should populate the Overview with content just to be consistent. WDYT?

Author: Sure, no prob

> ![VM details page - overview tab - affinity section](img/D1-0-0.jpg)

Reviewer: I wonder if this should be a secondary action button? We could see other actions on this page (services) and we don't want multiple primary actions on a page.

Author: Do we want to include an action here at all or just drop this in the Actions menu?
It was the same with Services section on this page and we generally thought that actions per section are nice, but left the actions to the Actions menu in the end (And I forgot about it here obviously...)

Reviewer: ah yes, I would lean towards the action menu then.

Affinity rules can be viewed and managed per resource as well. The list is located in the resource details page, on the overview tab in Affinity rules section under 'Services' if those exist.

## Creating an affinity rule from a resource details page

![Affinity rule modal - default](img/D1-1-0.jpg)

Clicking on the "Add affinity rule" button at the top of the affinity list will open up the "Add affinty rule" modal.
It is the same as the modal from the Affinity Rules list page except one thing: The resource itself is already added to the "Select resources by label" field.
The resource will be mentioned by it's name. 
Technically, this "direct selection" of this resource is not actually a direct selection. We already mentioned that selecting a resource directly is not the best way since that resource will crush and regenerate more than a few times. Instead, that  selection will provide a new, uniquew label to the specified resource. We do not need to surface this to the user, at least not for now.

> ![Affinity rule modal - selecting labels](img/D1-1-1.jpg)

Reviewer: I wonder if it would less confusing to not list the resource in the label list but above it?
Select resources by label to attach/reject Vm-name-123. (maybe this text could be dynamic based on the radio selection above).

Author: I started with that but had a hard time labeling this split between a resource and another group of resources (by labels). They are all flat, but any label I tried suggested otherwise, like:
**- Attach:**
[Resource-name]
**- With the following (select by labels):**
[input field]

So I thought,  dropping the resource name it the same pool represents that relation better.
Also, it does provide a way to select resources by name, which technically is possible.

BUT, if you mention it, then I guess it must feel weird...:)

I'll share some alternatives offline with you first

Author: I'm fine with adding "to attach/reject vm-name-123.
Should I bold it? do we do that in PF4, and in a field label?
![D1-1-0](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/48942365/60790114-6171d980-a169-11e9-9044-3e3fb0be8643.jpg)

Reviewer: I'm not sure there is specific direction in PF for this in labels but I think it makes sense.

> User enters a label. The resource name stays appear first in the field, even after adding labels. It will not be viewed as a label, but as a placeholder text.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
User enters a label. The resource name remains first in the field, even after adding labels. It will not be viewed as a label, but as a placeholder text.
```

The rule is ready to be applied. The user clicks 'Apply' and returns to the resource details page, where he left off.

> ## Bypassing a resource scheduling failure to to forced affinity rule

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Bypassing a resource scheduling failure due to a forced affinity rule
```

![Resource scheduling failure - modal](img/D3-1-0.jpg)

> If a resource cannot be scheduled due to a forced affinity rule, the user will recieve the a notification in the same format as any other scheduling failure, which is out of scope for this PR.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a resource cannot be scheduled due to a forced affinity rule, the user will receive a notification in the same format as any other scheduling failure.
```

Reviewer: I'm suggesting we remove the out of scope part. Can you create an issue that captures this requirement?

# Affinity

### About Affinity
Affinity allows the user to create a relationship between two resources when scheduling them on the cluster.
There are two high level relationship types:
Affinity - attaching a group of resources together, making them run together in the same environment.
Anti-affinity - creating a rejection relationship between a group of resources, thus avoiding scheduling any of them in the same environment.

Besides defining if we want to attach or reject resources to one another, we can choose to "force" this rule we are creating.
"Forcing" a rule means that the conditions of this rule must met, even if it means that some resources just won't be scheduled at all.

> ### a few techincal words

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Technical Definitions
```

> Affinity rules are Pod Properties, written in the pod deployment file. When a pod is scheduled, the deployment file states that there is an affinity rule condition which needs to be met.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Affinity rules are pod properties, written in the pod deployment file. When a pod is scheduled, the deployment file states that there is an affinity rule condition which needs to be met.
```

Applying an affinity rule to a resources is done via labels. Objects in OpenShift are ephemeral, and the way to target the same object which keeps crashing and regenerating is by its label.

## Affinity rules - list page

> ![Affinity list](img/D2-0-0.jpg)

Reviewer: nit pic but should we change this to "Affinity Rules" for consistency? I know we are moving to sentence case anyway so the alternative could be changing all the other nav items to sentence case. @beanh66 WDYT? Any idea when the console will move to sentence case? The "Add Affinity rule" button should be sentence case too.

Author: For now, I've changed the button to title case but left the page header as sentence case

Reviewer 2: I think the nav should be title case

All affinity rules within the system can be viewed and managed from this page. It is located in the main navigation, under 'Workloads' 

## Creating an Affinity rule from Affinity Rules page

> Clicking on the "Add Affinity rule" button at the top of the affinity list will open up the "Add Affinty rule" modal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Clicking on the "Add affinity rule" button at the top of the affinity list will open up the "Add affinity rule" modal.
```

> ![Affinity rule modal - default](img/D2-1-0.jpg)

Author: Oh... got it, sorry about that

Going top to bottom, the user will choose to create an affinity (attachment), which is pre-selected, or change to Anti-affinity (rejection).
Then, the user will select the resources he wishes to apply that rule to by adding their representative labels to the "Select resources by label" field.

> ![Force rule](img/D2-1-1.jpg)

Reviewer 2: Nit: Type on checkbox text... "form"->"from"

> ![Force rule](img/D2-1-1.jpg)

Reviewer: Hey Ran, for these modals I think we'll want to switch them to ones without the header. 
https://www.patternfly.org/v4/documentation/react/components/modal/
It will be nice to keep that secondary header helper text though.

> ![Force rule](img/D2-1-1.jpg)

Reviewer: I think the resources would be chips right? https://www.patternfly.org/v4/documentation/react/components/chipgroup/

Author: Not sure I follow.
As I understand, Chip is a visual represemntation of "applied filers".
Any entity with the following tag/attribute will be displayed via the chip's counter, followed by some list display method. It does not point to a specific entity. It does nothing by itself, only filters the "following". 
If we are talking about how to display the group of resources, then we have the labels for that.

Reviewer: ya that's true, my main point here is that we don't have the types of labels in PF4 and I don't think we should design new ones. So pulling from PF4 chips would be the closest thing, otherwise we should propose that labels have the ability to add an icon.

Author: I agree that it is problematic to place Affinity rules under the Workloads tab. While it may be the most intuitive place to find it, it is not a workload per se.
I'm offering two alternatives in "Affinity rule list placement" on this doc:
https://docs.google.com/document/d/10l_4BQ-Wyx_n87y9-bzNScEtSz0ycDM3OxSr4kuK_bM/edit#heading=h.askclzqng25z

Summary:
These Affinity rules have two flows, from a specific workload (K8), and one as an abstract rule applied per label (Virtualization logic applied through k8 mechanism). Because of that, we need access to a list abstracted from workloads with an action to create a new (abstract) rule.
"Home" tab for Administrator persona and "Advanced" tab for Developer persona (toggled at the top of the side nav). But that consistency is not that important in terms of use-case. But It is somewhat not that important as the rest of the items there (I suspect).
"Administration" tab for Administrator persona is also an option since affinity by labels (Affinity groups) is also a sort of "Setting" and it is less prominent than the "home" tab

Reviewer: I've followed up on this with Matt Carrano on the Patternfly side and it looks like there is some ongoing discussion around tags.
https://github.com/patternfly/patternfly-next/issues/759
I think we can hold on updating until things are more solid on the Patternfly side.

Before applying, the user can check the "Force this rule" checkbox, making this rule a required condition when scheduling the resources targeted by the added labels above.

> ![applying rule](img/D2-1-2.jpg)

Reviewer 2: Same typo as above

> ![applying rule](img/D2-1-2.jpg)

Reviewer: another nit: "Apply rule" (sentence case)

The user hit "Apply rule".
![Rule added to list](img/D2-1-3.jpg)
The user now returns to the Affinity rules list.

# Affinity rules list on a resource details page

> ![VM details page - overview tab - Affinity section](img/D1-0-0.jpg)

Reviewer: I think for the (i) icons here we want a black (?) right?

Author: The PF4 site displays an Info icon with no circle, hope it is the right one

Reviewer: ya that's a bit misleading, I don't know what that icon is for from the site. This should align with what we use in the create VM form which is a ? in a circle.

Author: It's a question-circle... :)

> The user chose to apply this rule without "forcing" it.

Reviewer 2: The last screen we show is that it is being forced...should we change this text?

> The user now returns to the Affinity rules list.

Reviewer 2: Should we add another mock here showing the new rule in the list?

> ![VM details page - overview tab - affinity section](img/D1-0-0.jpg)

Author: Judging from the rest of the tabs, I would guess that sections within the Overview tab serve as a more dedicated view of one property of the resource (VM), sort of more detailed metadata.
I would guess that Tabs are more action-oriented,  serve as a management tool for any 'Plug-in' resources, VM settings or viewing a long list/log.

But then we have "Services" which is somewhere in between.
Maybe I'm just saying "when it doesn't always fit into the Overview, create a tab for it"...

> ![VM details page - overview tab - affinity section](img/D1-0-0.jpg)

Author: @beanh66 Did I get it right?

Affinity rules can be viewed and managed per resource as well. The list is located in the resource details page, on the overview tab in Affinity rules section under 'Services' if those exist.

## Creating an Affinity rule from a resource details page

![Affinity rule modal - default](img/D1-1-0.jpg)

Clicking on the "Add affinity rule" button at the top of the affinity list will open up the "Add affinty rule" modal.
It is the same as the modal from the Affinity Rules list page except one thing: The resource itself is already added to the "Select resources by label" field.
The resource will be mentioned by it's name. 

> Technically, this "direct selection" of this resource is not actually a direct selection. We already mentioned that selecting a resource directly is not the best way since that resource will crush and regenerate more than a few times. Instead, that selection will provide a new, unique label to the specified resource. We do not need to surface this to the user, at least not for now.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Technically, this "direct selection" of this resource is not actually a direct selection. We already mentioned that selecting a resource directly is not the best way since that resource could crash and regenerate multiple times. Instead, behind the scenes, that selection will provide a new, unique label to the specified resource. 
```

![Affinity rule modal - selecting labels](img/D1-1-1.jpg)

> User enters a label. The resource name remains first in the field, even after adding labels. It will not be viewed as a label, but as a placeholder text.

Reviewer: I think we can adjust this text now that you've moved the resource name up into the text area label text.

The rule is ready to be applied. The user clicks 'Apply' and returns to the resource details page, where he left off.

## Bypassing a resource scheduling failure due to a forced Affinity rule

> ![Resource scheduling failure - modal](img/D3-1-0.jpg)

Reviewer 2: Typo on "Ignore and schedule" button

> Technically, this "direct selection" of this resource is not actually a direct selection. We already mentioned that selecting a resource directly is not the best way since that resource will crush and regenerate more than a few times. Instead, that  selection will provide a new, uniquew label to the specified resource. We do not need to surface this to the user, at least not for now.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Technically, this "direct selection" of this resource is not actually a direct selection. We already mentioned that selecting a resource directly is not the best way since that resource will crush and regenerate more than a few times. Instead, that selection will provide a new, unique label to the specified resource. We do not need to surface this to the user, at least not for now.
```

> If a resource cannot be scheduled due to a forced affinity rule, the user will receive a notification in the same format as any other scheduling failure.

Reviewer: I might be missing something here but will this error be shown in the list view? If so wouldn't this be a popover on the status? 
If this is meant to be seen via a toast I'm not sure we want to go from a toast notification to a modal popup for more details, feels like a bit of an odd interaction. WDYT?

Author: I added this screen to mention that we need to notify the user in some manner that a resource can't be scheduled, in general.
The main question here is if we want to "push" this alert at all, or just be content with displaying it somewhere on the console. This question can be answered only by understanding what type of notifications do we want to push. So, this is a very big discussion at a much larger scope.

If we are want to "push" this then the notification drawer will probably be the only method in our arsenal. (I don't know what's the status with that one)

If we want to just display it somewhere on the console, then displaying it on we will probably see it in:
Pods list view and Pod/Deployment dashboard. Really don't know what can we display on VM list view since we don't display the number of replica sets there.
We can also add a column on the Affinity list that specifies the status of the resources. That one should cover "All resources deployed", "Some resources failed to be deployed", and "Pending deployment". But I don't think it is where the user will look for to see if all of the resources are deployed, to begin with.

@matthewcarleton 
We can stop this PR and examine all these options, where does that alert appear, and do we want to "push" it or not. We can break it to a different PR.
WDYT?

Reviewer: ah I see. You're right this is a larger discussion than this PR. I think we can probably note it in this PR and create an issue for it.

Author: [Issue](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-origin-design/issues/246) created

> ![Resource scheduling failure - modal](img/D3-1-0.jpg)

Reviewer 2: We should brainstorm (in a separate PR :) ) how the user might get notified of these scheduling failures if they don't actually attempt to create this resource manually. Some resources can be a part of a larger deployment or driven via a script outside of the UI and it would be great to maybe work in how these warnings might surface say in the dashboard.

Author: +1 
I excluded the entry point to this "Schedule failure" modal since I'm not sure if and how we push these kinds of notifications to the user. @lizsurette  Should I create an issue for that?

Reviewer 2: Yes for sure. No need to hold this PR up on that discussion.

Author: Dropping a link to the '[Resource scheduling failure](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-origin-design/issues/234)' issue here
